# Garter_Snake_SR
Code run for Biana Qiu's senior research thesis in 2026: The effects of habitat variables on site occupancy of the Common Gartersnake (Thamnophis sirtalis) on a restored prairie/wetland complex. Analysis ran on data gathered by Biana, Geoffrey R. Smith, Wesley O. Smith and many others throughout 2016-2025 in the Granville Schools Land Lab. Coverboards were checked for vertebrate presence nearly weekly in the morning from April to October from 2016-2025.

## Habitat Variable Sampling
Site covariates were measured at each gridpoint in the summers of 2018, 2019, 2022, and 2024, though 2022 was incomplete. We categorized habitat type as forb, grass, or forb/grass by visually deciding the relative dominance of forbs and grasses. P3 was labeled wetland due to its close proximity to the pond resulting in a flooding of the coverboards throughout parts of the year. We also counted the number of plants of each species using 0.5 m2 quadrats, the number of trees within 10 meters, and measured litter depth and maximum vegetation height at each coverboard before averaging values by gridpoint. Fixed variables across years included distance to water and distance to trail, measured via tape measure in 2018. The water distance variables were binned as 0-10, 11-25, 26-49, and ≥50 since during data collection, distances over 50 meters were already grouped. The four coverboards within each grid were grouped to reduce influence of spatial dependence, so only detections on a grid level for each survey date were assessed.
## Weather Data
Weather data was from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration's (NOAA) database of the nearest weather station containing consistent historical records for over a decade: Newark Heath Airport, OH (https://www.ncei.noaa.gov/access/search/data-search/). The data was averaged over each month.
## Analysis
For the occupancy analysis, 2016 was omitted from analysis due it being an exploratory starting year with less surveyed months and less coverboards per grid, resulting in a total analysis of 246 visits from 2017-2025. Yearly habitat covariates were only included in the as models for 2018, 2019, and 2024 and the fixed distance covariates were included for all years. 2022 additionally ran with the tree model and hab model, but the other yearly site covariates were not measured that year.
Habitat models were ranked by AICc instead of AIC due to small sample size (n=29) using package ‘AICcmodavg’
Single-season analysis only ran with site covariates and multi-season ran with site and weather covariates. The detection variables were run first with null occupancy and the best-fit detection model was used to run the occupancy models with. Single-season analysis included every variable for detection and occupancy due to the low number of variables for most years. For multi-season, the primary period was years (9) and secondary was months (7), so detections were grouped into presence/abseence by grids and by month. Multi-season analysis included only secondary period and the weather covariates as detection models. Google Earth (https://earth.google.com/web/) was used to trace and generate a KML file for the trails and ponds at the study site to use for mapping.
